Apologies, technical glitch.
Today I'm going to talk a little bit about the,
maybe we could call it the elephant in the room, I
don't know.
We're going to talk about authoritarianism and we're going
to talk about the fact that openness as a concept and the
way that the challenges and that the AT protocol was built to
kind of contest weren't necessarily designed to imagine that the country
in which it was built was going to be potentially an adversary
.
For context, I spent most of my career working in countries
where people did not assume that their governments were supportive of their
rights and freedoms and do not assume that a state is a
benevolent actor in the service of their interests.
And we have a, I think everybody knows very well,
the Silicon Valley vision and version of the history of the Internet
.
It's worth noting that many people never experienced that version of
the Internet and that the idea of the Internet as a space
for political contestation basically emerged coterminous with the
idea of the Internet.
So, TomlNet, which was the Toml nationalist
organizing newspaper and website, launched in 1997, the same year
that the New York Times went online.
Gapas revolutionaries were using tripod and early hosting service
in the early '90s to organize, as were Malays
ian independence activists.
So, we have a whole alternative history of the use of
the Internet for political activism and for resistance.
So, today, something like 25 countries are full democracies
, out of 184, 85, and only 75 or
so have democratic forms as a whole.
So, most people in the world have a very different relationship
with their governments and their understanding of what regulatory authority can do
and their understanding of what openness means in the context of societies
.
And I want to use that as a basis for trying to
establish some basic terms about what we mean by authoritarianism.
So, digital authoritarianism is a term that's been kind
of in vogue for the past five or six years,
and it describes very basically the use of technology to advance rep
ressive political interests.
A slightly older and I think more apt term is networked
authoritarianism, which emphasizes the idea that people can be co
-opted into supporting authoritarian power by participating in information systems
.
So, apologies if a lot of this is a little bit
dense, but there's a -- and maybe folks that you
all know all this already, and apologies if that's true
, but I feel like it's helpful to establish some kind
of grounding terminology and definitions.
In this space, the kind of epistemic challenges,
the idea that our information spaces are broken and fragmented,
as we heard so eloquently this morning, the idea that
that's true is not solely an artifact of our technological afford
ances and underlying financial incentives.
In many cases, this is the result of intentional efforts by
people with power to shape narrative, to persuade and influence,
to simultaneously narrow spaces for expression and political action, through regulatory
and through technological approaches.
So, this isn't happening organically as a result of
market artifacts.
That's also important, but it's not only that.
And in defining the threat, we can also define the fields
of contestation.
And I'm not going to read this to you.
You can read it yourself.
But in general, authoritarianism has a -- it's useful
to give it a tight and narrow definition so that we can
talk about it.
There are many definitions of authoritarianism.
This is the one that I'm working with.
And I find it to be useful because it allows us to
talk about authoritarian practices and not just authoritarian states.
So, you can have authoritarianism as a practice that exists
within a state that is technically categorized by political scientists as
not authoritarian.
And things like appropriate citizen oversight or the use of accountability and
transparency and legitimacy in the application of technology is key to this
definition.
So, even in countries that formerly are democratic, you might
find evidence of authoritarian practices that significantly affect our ability to
function in terms of our ability to express ourselves or mobilize or
build movements.
And many of us in this room, I'm guessing,
also live in countries where there is the potential or actual presence
of democratic backsliding.
That's a term that I hope everybody understands.
Basically, it means when democratic governments are suddenly no longer democratic
.
And what we're seeing in our geopolitical space, which
is the kind of the end of the post-World War
II, potentially the end of the post-World War II
liberal era.
And the emergence of a transactional geopolitics that kind of
threatens to undermine a lot of the basic premises for what we
mean by openness in the international order.
And that idea of openness in the international order is twinned
to the idea of openness in information spaces.
So, when we, building open, decentralized technologies, use
language to define what we mean by openness, we are also
inherently talking about this other history.
And if that history is now being challenged, what does it
mean for us in this room?
More specifically, on the left, this is what authoritarianism
does to us.
Pluralistic ignorance, which means the fact that you don
't know, I don't know what you're thinking,
you don't know what I'm thinking, we have no
idea that we might have some ideas in common.
Social isolation and epistemic vertigo, which means that
we have no basis for common knowledge.
These are the challenges that our information spaces are creating for us
.
And again, we heard a lot about that this morning,
so I don't necessarily feel a need to repeat myself or
repeat what was said.
And then our goals on the right, and this is a
set of normative claims, like, I'm for these
things, so I'm not going to pretend that I'm
not.
Shared reality, collective action, information integrity, values that
support more democratic participation, more shared power.
That's what's at stake.
Before, so I am the executive chair of the newly formed
Modal Foundation, which is the entity, the legal entity
behind Eurosky.
And I've been in this role and working in this space
for about eight months.
Before that, I spent a huge chunk of my life working
in countries and contexts that were politically contested.
And I spent the last decade working on research in information ecosystems
.
The last big project I did was called the Unfreedom
Monitor, in which I did a 20-country study of
the relationship between technology, regulatory structures, and narrative power.
And the essence of that idea is that regulatory and technical systems
are being used to narrow the space for expression and political participation
.
And the authorities in many countries are using that resultantly narrow
ed space to amplify a set of narratives to try to convince
people to give up their rights and freedoms in exchange for their
safety.
And I found that to be true in many different political contexts
in countries around the world.
And this was a participatory research project.
About 30 of us worked on it over a two-year
period.
Very briefly, looking at this topic, authoritarian strategies involve coerc
ion, co-optation, and persuasion.
So I'm not going to define them too carefully.
I think you understand what they mean.
Fields of contestation, I already mentioned.
And then the primary actors, states, cooperations, and
publics.
And we found in this research that countries have become very ad
ept at remixing these different fields in order to create fields
of repression.
And it's very hard to contest.
So I'm going to give one simple example that many of
you are probably aware of.
That's the Twitter files.
Everybody know what the Twitter files was?
Anybody not know?
Twitter files was an information operation.
And it was a group of, I'll call them political
operatives or information operatives, who claimed that the Biden
administration in the United States was censoring expression around vaccine,
around vaccine communications, and trying to force the social media companies
to remove anti-vax narratives and misinformation and disinformation
.
It was untrue, but it crossed all of these fields
in its architecture.
And it was very, very successful as an information operation.
It targeted information integrity researchers, and it destroyed the field of
information research in the United States as a result.
These were the people who were exposing truths on the platform,
studying the platforms, and identifying systemic problems on the platforms.
They did this by creating a false narrative of state censorship.
That's the narrative one of having a political ally take over
Twitter and changing the algorithm to change what we could see.
Spinning up a false congressional investigation and suing the individual
researchers who were involved in doing the research in the first place
.
And finally, pressuring the institutions and funders of this
research with the threats of even greater losses in the event that
they didn't defund this work.
And that was both state entities and private entities that were funding
this type of research.
And the result is decimated field of analysis, less knowledge
, more social isolation, and more epistemic vertigo
.
Very briefly, this is the Information Monitor project.
I mentioned it already, so I'm just going to very
briefly talk through some themes in terms of understanding how we think
about the system.
Four big categories of information space.
Access, data governance, information, and speech.
These are all contested areas where the battle over rights and
freedoms in information spaces are happening.
Social controls that governments and states are applying through
those fields.
Freedom restrictions, information manipulation, internet control, surveillance, system
management.
Freedom attacks, and technology controls.
I can come back to these later if you want me to
.
I'm going to get on to open social protocols fast,
so I'm just going to zip through these so you have
a sense.
This is published documentation, and I can direct you to it
if you want to read it later.
And lastly, the types of concrete harms that people experience.
Intimidation, judicial, physical, and technical are
broad categories, and these are kind of extensible issues.
The things that happen to individuals or groups as a result of
participating in trying to express or participate in civic life.
Okay.
Open social as a field of contestation.
I have two more slides only, and then we'll hopefully
have about 10 minutes to talk.
Open social technologies like ATProto and everything that we're
doing here today have the potential to offer a structural response to
the primary levers of control that we're experiencing.
So coercion, resistance, co-option, exit
, persuasion, algorithmic agency.
And we have a bunch of potential tools available to us that
the kinds of technologies that we're building enable us, that
allow us or help us to act.
And these are shared truths in public data that's kind of
a core backbone of what it means to build open public information
as a ballast or as a counterweight to attempts to
create isolation.
Information and identity provenance, data ownership, decentralization,
and as a mechanism for resilience, as a mechanism for economic
and technological and informational resilience.
Cooperative models that allow us to share resources and drive costs
down.
And the idea that we can actually use different states and their
sovereignty, a strategic depth for resistance.
So we have the option of other jurisdictions to support actions.
There are others, other affordances and other things that could
be built.
And that's kind of going to be the question in the
room.
The counterweight is what does this kind of reliance on
an open system expose us to?
One is that provenance becomes evidence.
You know, immutable provenance of information and identity also
creates risk.
Public data and context remix.
So once you put something out into a public network, somebody
else can take it and put it somewhere else out of your
control.
And that is, that's a feature in our system when
we have a guarantee of a non-authoritarian state that
is actually available to adjudicate, you know, ad
judicate your rights in a way that is legitimate and equitable
.
And when it's not, when that's not true,
it becomes a serious risk.
We've already seen that states are quite adept at identifying
vulnerable targets within networks of activists, within networks of people who
express themselves or use open technologies as a way of breaking collective
action.
Picking off vulnerable individuals or groups, making examples of them
in ways that are silencing or suppressing and create fear
that suffuse civic networks.
And resource scarcity because a lot of us are enthusiasts, a
lot of us are doing this out of a passion.
And you can do that until you're hit by a slap
lawsuit or until you're hit by any kind of, like
, serious legal counterweight that can absorb years of your life
and all of your savings.
So lawfare, that's commonly called.
Narrative power and market pressure.
Those are the forces that are often arrayed against open networks
.
So that's the end of what I have to say.
I hope that will help us to think about and frame as
a, think about it and create a frame for this moment
.
And I'd be super happy to hear what others have to
say about this.
If we have, we have about five minutes.
So, and also I will say, this is a public
streamed conversation.
So please don't share anything sensitive.
I'm very happy to talk about this.
Anything that is, shouldn't be public offline.
Thank you.
I see one hand over
here.
Oh, right there first.
Yeah, very interesting.
Thanks for structuring all this.
These tools that you mentioned, could you connect it up with
BlueSky or the ADProtosystem, which
of these sort of are available already, what needs to be
done in the ecosystem to foster some of these other things?
So if you could just try to bridge that gap, I
would appreciate it.
You mean the, this one, tools for resistance one?
Yeah, all, yeah.
Like the strategies.
I mean, it's not only about, it's not
only about BlueSky, but there are some things in
the BlueSky system that are amenable to, that
I would put on the pro side.
And so algorithmic, the ability to build your own feed
to ensure that the information that you're seeing and share it
in a very direct and unmediated way in the way
that monolithic platforms don't allow you, affords or
facilitates information integrity.
It foregrounds provenance and foregrounds individual connectivity, which
diminishes social and informational fragmentation.
So that's a great example of how this can, this
is a benefit.
Another one is public data, because public information shared widely at
a social level is, especially information that has, that is
like validated at the provenance level, is a core part
of being able to push back at a social scale against authoritarian
framings that try to strip information out of our civic space
and make knowledge a political tool instead of a basis for shared
facticity.
There could be, there are, I mean, I think
a lot of what's happening in the AT proto-s
cience community is exactly about this, honestly.
I mean, epistemics, scientific epistemics is
kind of the highest level of knowledge in terms of its rigor
, but of course there's journal, there's also journal
istic epistemics, there's legal epistemics,
there's all of these different standards of knowledge and the ability
to create and manage different levels of standards of knowledge within any
kind of kind of knowledge sorting space, I find to be
incredibly valuable and useful.
And I think there's a lot we could do there,
and I also, once we get to permission data, that
also adds a really interesting layer here because then, then we
aren't necessarily at risk of putting everything out into the open
all the time in ways that might create, rebound on people
as individuals in a network.
And that's actually one of the questions for the room,
I mean, I have ideas about that, but I imagine
there's probably more that could be done, more that could
be built, and there are probably your vulnerabilities that I haven
't identified, I didn't manage, I'm sure I
didn't hit all of them.
So I have something, these are the ones that are most
evident to me.
Yeah, I have another question here, please, or comment
.
Yeah, I just had a question, I'm really curious
about the research about kind of authoritarian practices that are being done
, and I was curious to know if there was, if
that research was applied to companies or corporation, and corporations in
the sense of how there might be authoritarian practices that are happening
through like corporate levers, I'm curious about that.
Very often what we see is some kind of combinatorial
approach, so a state will either co-opt or co
erce a company, or those companies will become contracts providers
for technologies that are being used for, so the spyware
industry is a great example, right?
That's quite a profitable industry, and spyware used narrow
ly to target things like sexual predators with like appropriate legal oversight
is not necessarily an authoritarian tool, so the idea that we
have authoritarian technologies is actually a little bit not the way I
would phrase it.
But when that technology is to surveil people, but when
that technology is used to surveil people en masse without oversight
, then those companies are facilitating authoritarianism.
The other piece of this is you will see, like I
can think of a great example in Myanmar from a few years
ago when the government forced the sale of a telecommunications
company owned by Norway, a Norwegian company, and then used
all of the, got access through that sale to all of
the personal data of the millions of people, the tens of
millions of people who had cell phone network, whose cell phone
networks provisioned through that company.
So they forced a military, so they forced a sale to
a military company, and then got access to personal data of
like half the country as a result.
So that's how, that's how, it's not
, that tends to be how the dynamics work.
Do we have time for one more question, or are we
good?
One more.
Or comment, if there is one?
Okay.
If not?
Oh, Julia, great.
Can we go around?
That panel's supposed to be really loud.
No, it's not.
Okay.
Well, first, thanks for this talk.
I think it's super interesting and very, very relevant and
timely.
I think one of the things we talked a lot about,
at least in your talk, is about how open systems can
kind of provide these tools for resistance, or at least provide
a playground for developing and sustaining tools of resistance.
I was wondering if you can speak a little bit more about
the different types of risks that open systems also bring.
Yeah, like a little bit more so, and if we
've seen any evidence of that.
Like, for example, I think, you know, we
know that they're having like long running information campaigns.
Does it become easier to track because it's public record?
Or are there other new novel ways of manipulating information campaigns because
it is an open network that kind of like builds assumed trust
, if that makes sense?
Yeah.
One of the things I was mulling is if and
when there might be some kind of systemic attack against the AT
proto.
And to me, the measure is I came up with a
couple answers.
The first is this space becomes important enough at a social level
that it becomes a particular threat to a group in power.
And we've already started to see some intimations of that
on the Blue Sky Network in the past year.
So that's one thing that I keep my eyes out for
.
So trolling or provocations like the Trump administration signs up
for a Blue Sky account and then starts intentionally breaking the terms
of service, hoping to get kicked off the network that they
could then use that as an example or as an opportunity to
bring a lawsuit against, a lawsuit for censorship against the company
.
Another one would be at the level of narrative power, which
is the systematic attempt to kind of pigeonhole the vast and
quite differentiated set of communities that are on Blue Sky as
a certain one political class, like unified ideological political class that
are not worth listening to.
So so so we've seen that again and again, oh
, this is just like a liberal pocket.
And so you can just safely ignore it because you're not
going to have anything other than an echo chamber here in the
Blue Sky context.
A third would be using it as a as a like as
an intentional provocation.
So leveraging it against.
I mean, I can imagine an external state actor like,
say, the Iranian government kind of coming onto the platform and
mass and then trying and or even somebody saying, these P
.
D.
S., like loading it up with pornography and then creating a
case that then collapses the whole thing.
So using the judicial system against itself.
And there's another I could probably I don't want to
give the other side too many other options, but there's
a lot of ways that you could red team this in ways
that are actually really important to think about.
And I would love to see some kind of careful and strategic
thinking about how to protect both the people on the network,
firstly, and secondly, the network itself.
So, thank you.
Excellent.
Thank you very much.
A round of applause for Ivan Plea.
.